= Macro Rules for TM 1RB---0RB0LA2RA_2LB2LA3RA4LB0LB =

== Transition Table (2-state, 5-symbol) ==

<pre>
       0     1     2     3     4
  A   1RB   ---   0RB   0LA   2RA
  B   2LB   2LA   3RA   4LB   0LB
</pre>

Transition 
<math>
A,1
</math>
 is undefined (halt).

== Tape Structure ==

After initialization, the tape has the form (physical L to R):

<pre>
    0^inf  1 3  [binary cells in {2,3}]  [HEAD]  [ternary pairs]  2+  0^inf
           ~~~                                                     ~~
       terminator                                              padding
</pre>

* '''Terminator''': cells <code>1</code>, <code>3</code> at the physical left edge of nonzero tape.
* '''Binary region''': cells in 
<math>
\{2,3\}
</math>
 between the terminator and the head. Encoding: <code>2</code> = bit 0, <code>3</code> = bit 1. LSB is closest to the head.
* '''Head''': at the boundary between binary and ternary regions.
* '''Ternary region''': consecutive pairs of cells, each pair encoding one ternary digit. Encoding: pair 
<math>
(2,2)
</math>
 = digit 0, pair 
<math>
(0,2)
</math>
 = digit 1, pair 
<math>
(4,2)
</math>
 = digit 2. LSB pair is closest to the head.
* '''Padding''': one or more cells of value <code>2</code> at the right edge (extends during RInc bounce).

In mxdys's reversed notation: 
<math>
.22 (42|02|22)^* (<A|B>) (2|3)^* 31.
</math>

== Canonical Configs ==

'''CycleStart(<code>bin</code>, <code>tern</code>, <code>pad</code>)''':
State A, head reading symbol <code>2</code>, at boundary between binary and ternary.

<pre>
    left  = bin ++ [3, 1]          (binary cells LSB-first, then reversed terminator)
    head  = 2
    right = tern ++ replicate pad 2 (ternary pairs, then padding 2s)
</pre>

where every cell in <code>bin</code> is <code>2</code> or <code>3</code>, and <code>tern</code> is a concatenation of pairs from 
<math>
\{(2,2), (0,2), (4,2)\}
</math>
.

Observed at steps: 117, 155, 169, 173, 800, ...

== RInc (Right Increment) ==

Starts from CycleStart. The head sweeps right, alternating 
<math>
A,2 \to 0RB
</math>
 and 
<math>
B,2 \to 3RA
</math>
, converting ternary pairs 
<math>
22 \to 03
</math>
. When it reaches the right padding/blank edge, it bounces (
<math>
B,0 \to 2LB
</math>
 extending tape) and sweeps back left, converting 
<math>
03 \to 42
</math>
 via 
<math>
B,3 \to 4LB
</math>
 and 
<math>
B,0 \to 2LB
</math>
.

During the leftward sweep, the head crosses back into the binary region and propagates a carry: 
<math>
B,3 \to 4LB
</math>
 continues the carry through 1-bits, 
<math>
B,2 \to 3RA
</math>
 stops the carry by flipping a 0-bit to 1.

'''Normal carry (binary has a 0-bit):'''
Binary value increments by 1. No change to binary digit count.
After cleanup (
<math>
A,4 \to 2RA
</math>
 chain), returns to CycleStart with <code>binary</code>+1.

'''Full carry (all binary bits are 1):'''
Carry propagates through all binary bits and into the terminator.
<math>
B,3 \to 4LB
</math>
 hits terminator cell <code>3</code>, 
<math>
B,1 \to 2LA
</math>
 hits terminator cell <code>1</code>.
<math>
A,0 \to 1RB
</math>
 at blank re-creates terminator one position left.
<math>
B,2 \to 3RA
</math>
 and 
<math>
A,4 \to 2RA
</math>
 cleanup.
Result: <code>binary</code> resets to all 0s with one additional digit, terminator shifts left.

After RInc, the ternary region is all 
<math>
(4,2)
</math>
 pairs (digit 2 = max value), and one additional pair may have been created from the padding.

== LInc (Left Decrement of Ternary) ==

Immediately follows RInc (the machine is at CycleStart after RInc).
The head enters the ternary region: 
<math>
A,2 \to 0RB
</math>
 then B reads the first ternary pair.

'''Decrement of first (LSB) ternary digit:'''
* If digit = 2 (pair 
<math>
42
</math>
): 
<math>
B,4 \to 0LB
</math>
, then bounce 
<math>
\to
</math>
 converts to 
<math>
(0,2)
</math>
 = digit 1. (The LInc borrow doesn't propagate.)
* If digit = 1 (pair 
<math>
02
</math>
): 
<math>
B,0 \to 2LB
</math>
, 
<math>
B,2 \to 3RA
</math>
, eventually 
<math>
\to
</math>
 converts to 
<math>
(2,2)
</math>
 = digit 0. (Simple decrement.)
* If digit = 0 (pair 
<math>
22
</math>
): borrow propagation, analogous to binary carry in RInc.

'''Borrow propagation''': trailing 0-digits (22 pairs) get set to digit 2 (42 pairs), and the first non-zero digit is decremented.

After LInc, returns to CycleStart with ternary value decremented by 1.

== Normal Cycle ==

One complete cycle = RInc + LInc:
* Binary counter increments by 1
* Ternary counter decrements by 1
* Step count is proportional to tape length (which grows slowly)
* Returns to CycleStart

This repeats until the ternary counter reaches 0 (all pairs are 
<math>
(2,2)
</math>
).

== Overflow (Ternary = 0) ==

When the ternary counter is 0 and the next decrement would underflow, a complex reset sequence occurs. In mxdys's terminology:

# '''LOv''': Adds a new zero-digit to the ternary counter.
# '''RRstS''': Consumes binary 1-bits, creating new ternary counter segments.
# '''RRst0''': Initializes the new ternary counter to all-2s (max).
# '''LRst''': Merges ternary counter segments.

Net effect of overflow:
* Ternary digit count increases (by 2 in even overflows, by 1 in odd overflows — based on observed pattern of alternating "immediate" and "extended" overflows).
* Binary counter is modified (may reset lower bits, grow digit count).
* Ternary counter is re-initialized near max value for the new digit count.

=== Observed overflow data ===

<pre>
    T_digits  B_value    step  delta_B
    --------  -------  ------  -------
           2        0      93
           3        1     117        1  (immediate)
           4       10     764        9  = 3^2
           5       11     800        1  (immediate)
           6      129    6635      118
           7      130    6685        1  (immediate)
           8     1425   59170     1295
           9     1426   59228        1  (immediate)
</pre>

Pattern: overflows come in pairs. Odd-to-even 
<math>
T\_digits
</math>
 transitions are "immediate" (
<math>
\Delta B = 1
</math>
). Even-to-odd transitions take many cycles (
<math>
\Delta B
</math>
 grows 
<math>
\sim
</math>
exponentially).

== Overflow Details ==

=== Even overflow (<code>pad</code>=0 → <code>pad</code>=1) ===

When ternary is all-zero at 
<math>
\text{pad}=0
</math>
, the 
<math>
\text{overflow\_cycle}
</math>
 theorem applies:
* Input: <code>CycleStart bin (rep s2 (2*d)) 0</code> (
<math>
d
</math>
 ternary digit pairs, all zero)
* Output: <code>CycleStart bin' (repPair s4 s2 d) 1</code> (
<math>
d
</math>
 pairs of digit 2 = max)
* Binary is incremented by 1 (via <code>carry_stop</code> or <code>overflow_carry</code>)
* Ternary is re-initialized to all-max (value 
<math>
3^d - 1
</math>
)

The binary increment may be:
* '''carry_stop''': flips lowest <code>s2</code> <math> \to </math> <code>s3</code>, standard +1. Binary length unchanged.
* '''overflow_carry''': all bits are <code>s3</code> (value 
<math>
2^n-1
</math>
), wraps to <code>rep s2 (n+1)</code> (value 0), carry absorbed by terminator which shifts left. Binary grows by 1 digit.

=== Odd overflow (<code>pad</code>=1 → <code>pad</code>=0) ===

When ternary is all-zero at 
<math>
\text{pad}=1
</math>
, the head enters ternary, bounces, and cascades left into the binary region. Cases depend on the leading binary bits:

'''Case 
<math>
k=0
</math>
''' (<code>bin</code> starts with <code>s2</code>, i.e., binary value is even):
* The 
<math>
\text{overflow\_odd}
</math>
 theorem applies
* Input: <code>CycleStart (s2 :: bin_rest) (rep s2 (2*d)) 1</code>
* Output: <code>CycleStart bin_rest (rep s2 (2*(d+2))) 0</code>
* The leading <code>s2</code> is consumed (absorbed into new ternary)
* Ternary grows by 2 digit pairs (
<math>
d \to d+2
</math>
), re-initialized to all-zero
* Binary shrinks by 1 cell
* Steps: 
<math>
6d + 9
</math>

'''Case 
<math>
k=1
</math>
''' (<code>bin</code> = <code>s3 :: s2 :: bin_rest</code>, exactly one leading <code>s3</code>):
* The 
<math>
\text{overflow\_odd\_k1}
</math>
 theorem applies
* Input: <code>CycleStart (s3 :: s2 :: bin\_rest) (rep s2 (2*d)) 1</code>
* Output: <code>CycleStart bin\_rest (s0 :: s2 :: rep s2 (2*(d+1))) 1</code>
* The leading <code>s3</code> and <code>s2</code> are consumed, creating ternary digit 1 (pair <code>s0</code>,<code>s2</code>)
* Ternary grows by 2 pairs (
<math>
d \to d+2
</math>
 total), first digit = 1, rest = 0
* <code>pad</code> stays at 1 (another odd overflow follows with the new nonzero ternary)
* Steps: 
<math>
6d + 10
</math>

'''Case 
<math>
k \ge 2
</math>
''' (<code>bin</code> = <code>rep s3 (k+1) ++ s2 :: bin_rest</code>, multiple leading <code>s3</code>s):
* Not yet proved. The cascade creates 
<math>
k+1
</math>
 consecutive <code>s0</code> cells in the ternary region, which is not valid ternary for 
<math>
k \ge 2
</math>
 (pairs would be (<code>s0</code>,<code>s0</code>) etc.)
* Needs separate analysis

'''Case all-<code>s3</code>''' (<code>bin</code> = <code>rep s3 dd</code>):
* Carry propagates through all binary cells into the terminator
* Verified by simulation: this ALWAYS leads to A reading <code>s1</code> 
<math>
\to
</math>
 HALT
* Must prove this configuration is unreachable

=== Parity of binary at odd overflow ===

The leading bit of binary at odd overflow is NOT fixed — both 
<math>
k=0
</math>
 and 
<math>
k \ge 1
</math>
 occur in practice:

<pre>
    T_dig  B_val  binOdd  case
        3      1    true   k≥1 (s3 leading)
        5     11    true   k≥1 (s3 leading)
        7    130   false   k=0 (s2 leading)
        9   1425    true   k≥1 (s3 leading)
</pre>

=== Binary value trajectory ===

Tracing binary value (V) at even overflow entries and the parity of <code>bin_rest</code> at odd overflow outputs (the value that becomes the next even overflow input):

<pre>
    Era  V_entry  binOdd  d   V_after_era  bin_rest_val  binOdd(rest)
      0        1    true  4            22            11         true
      1       11    true  6           260           130        FALSE
      2      130   false  8          2851          1425         true
      3     1425    true 10         29754         14877         true
      4    14877    true 12         38414         19207         true
      5    19207    true 14        870016        435008        FALSE
</pre>

The pattern of <code>binOdd(bin_rest)</code> is: T, F, T, T, T, F, F, F, ...
This is NOT periodic and NOT constant.

'''CRITICAL FINDING:''' No simple mod-based parity invariant can determine <code>binOdd</code> at even overflow entries. The unconditional invariant <code>binOdd bin = (ternOdd tern == (pad == 1))</code> was proved preserved by <code>cycle_nonzero</code> (both flip) and <code>overflow_cycle</code>, but is FALSE at the output of <code>overflow_odd</code>: <code>binOdd bin_rest = true</code> fails at era 1 (<code>bin_rest</code> value 130 is even).

The binary value at era end depends on the wrap history during <code>cycle_nonzero</code>: binary wraps (<code>overflow_carry</code>) multiple times per era since 
<math>
3^d \gg 2^{\text{bin.length}}
</math>
. The value after wraps is 
<math>
V_0 + T - \sum(2^{n_i})
</math>
 where 
<math>
n_i
</math>
 are binary lengths at each wrap. This makes the mod-4 (and higher) behavior of 
<math>
V_{\text{end}}
</math>
 depend on the exact wrap schedule, which varies per era.

=== Safety: binary never all-<code>s3</code> at odd overflow ===

All-<code>s3</code> at odd overflow (binary = <code>rep s3 dd</code>) leads to HALT (confirmed by simulation for all tested <code>dd</code> and <code>d</code> values). The nonhalting proof MUST show this never occurs.

'''What doesn't work:'''
* Parity invariant: <code>binOdd</code> at even overflow is not always true (era 2 has V=130, binOdd=false). So we cannot prove binOdd=false at odd overflow.
* <code>binValue</code> conservation 
<math>
V+T=\text{const}
</math>
: FALSE because <code>overflow_carry</code> resets binary value to 0, not +1. The sum changes at every wrap.
* Any simple mod-k invariant: the binary value mod 4 at overflow points depends on wrap history, which has no periodic pattern.

'''What might work:'''
* General overflow theorem for arbitrary 
<math>
k
</math>
: prove that for any 
<math>
k
</math>
 leading <code>s3</code>s followed by <code>s2::bin_rest</code>, the overflow produces a valid CycleStart. Combined with proving all-<code>s3</code> is unreachable, this would close all cases.
* Binary length growth argument: show 
<math>
2^{\text{bin.length}}
</math>
 grows faster than 
<math>
3^d
</math>
, so that the gap (
<math>
2^n - 1 - \text{binValue}
</math>
) is always positive at odd overflow. But 
<math>
2^{\text{bin.length}} < 3^d
</math>
 in practice (wraps always happen), so this argument cannot work directly.
* Computational verification: verify the first N eras by computation, then show a structural property (e.g., binary length 
<math>
\ge d + C
</math>
) holds from era N onward, making all-<code>s3</code> impossible.
* The all-<code>s3</code> case requires 
<math>
\text{binValue} = 2^n - 1
</math>
, which means exactly 
<math>
T - \sum(2^{n_i}) + V_0 = 2^{n_{\text{final}}} - 1
</math>
. This is a precise Diophantine condition that may be provable to never hold.

=== Multi-phase overflow structure ===

The simulation data reveals that overflows are more complex than simple single-step transitions. The 
<math>
\Delta B
</math>
 values between consecutive 
<math>
T_{\text{dig}}
</math>
 transitions are:

<pre>
    T_dig transition  delta_B
    2 → 3             1 (immediate)
    3 → 4             9 = 3^2
    4 → 5             1 (immediate)
    5 → 6             118
    6 → 7             1 (immediate)
    7 → 8             1295
</pre>

The non-immediate 
<math>
\Delta B
</math>
 values (9, 118, 1295) are NOT simple powers of 3. This suggests that what the proof models as "one overflow + one era of cycle_nonzero" may actually involve nested canonical states at intermediate ternary sizes. The proof's 
<math>
\text{overflow\_cycle}
</math>
 theorem captures one phase of a multi-phase process, producing intermediate CycleStart states with smaller ternary counters than expected.

However, this does not affect correctness of the nonhalting argument — each intermediate CycleStart is still a valid canonical form, and the proof only needs to show that every canonical form leads to another canonical form (progress), not that eras have a specific structure.

== Nonhalting Argument ==

The machine never halts because:
# The normal cycle always terminates (finite sweep + carry, bounded by tape size).
# When ternary overflows, the reset always terminates and produces a valid new CycleStart with more ternary digits.
# The process repeats forever: each era has finitely many cycles, each overflow leads to a new era.
# The undefined transition A,1 is never reached because binary is never all-<code>s3</code> at odd overflow (preventing the carry cascade from reaching the terminator).

Point 4 is the crux — it requires showing all-<code>s3</code> is unreachable. See the "Safety" section above for the current state of this argument.

=== Proof status ===

The Lean proof in <code>machine.lean</code> establishes nonhalt modulo '''1 sorry''' in <code>canonical_progress</code>. The proof uses an unconditional parity invariant as IsCanonical field 8, but this invariant is FALSE for some reachable states.

'''IsCanonical fields''' (current, 8 fields — field 8 is WRONG):
# <code>c = CycleStart bin_cells tern_cells pad</code>
# <code>∀ s ∈ bin_cells, s = s2 ∨ s = s3</code>
# <code>ValidTern tern_cells</code>
# <code>pad ≤ 1</code>
# <code>tern_cells.length ≥ 2</code>
# <code>bin_cells ≠ []</code>
# <code>pad = 1 → bin_cells.length ≥ 2</code>
# <code>binOdd bin_cells = (ternOdd tern_cells == (pad == 1))</code> ← '''FALSE at era 2'''

Field 8 is preserved by <code>cycle_nonzero</code> (both <code>binOdd</code> and <code>ternOdd</code> flip each step) and by <code>overflow_cycle</code> (<code>binOdd</code> flips, <code>ternOdd</code> stays false). But it is NOT preserved by <code>overflow_odd</code>: the output requires <code>binOdd bin_rest = true</code>, which is false when <code>bin_rest</code> has even value (occurs at era 1: <code>bin_rest</code>=130).

'''Proved theorems:'''
* `reaches_canonical`: 
<math>
\text{native\_decide}
</math>
 (117 steps)
* `cycle_nonzero`: fully proved, preserves all 8 fields
* `overflow_cycle` (even overflow): fully proved
* `overflow_odd` (odd overflow k=0): proved (6d+9 steps)
* `overflow_odd_k1` (odd overflow k=1): proved (6d+10 steps)
* At even overflow: parity invariant gives binOdd=true 
<math>
\to
</math>
 hlen2 
<math>
\to
</math>
 bin'.length 
<math>
\ge
</math>
 2
* At odd overflow: parity invariant gives binOdd=false 
<math>
\to
</math>
 k=0 only 
<math>
\to
</math>
 all other cases eliminated by contradiction

'''Remaining sorry (1):'''
<code>binOdd bin_rest = true</code> at k=0 odd overflow output — '''unprovable (false)'''.

'''Consequence:''' The proof structure with the parity invariant as field 8 cannot work. Either:
# Remove field 8 and handle all odd overflow cases (k=0, k=1, k≥2, all-<code>s3</code>) individually — reverting to the original 4-sorry structure
# Find a correct invariant that rules out all-<code>s3</code>

=== Binary length changes ===

* overflow_carry: bin grows by 1 (rep s3 d 
<math>
\to
</math>
 rep s2 (d+1))
* carry_stop: bin stays same length
* cycle_nonzero: bin.length 
<math>
\ge
</math>
 bin.length (never shrinks)
* odd overflow k=0: bin shrinks by 1
* odd overflow k=1: bin shrinks by 2
* odd overflow k≥2: bin shrinks by k+1

During each era, binary wraps multiple times (
<math>
3^d \gg 2^{\text{bin.length}}
</math>
), growing by 
<math>
\sim 3
</math>
-5 cells per era from wraps. Ternary grows by 2 pairs per era. Binary length at even overflow entries: 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 18, 21, 24, ...

'''NOTE:''' 
<math>
k \ge 2
</math>
 IS reachable (B_val=11 at T_dig=5 has binary [<code>s3</code>,<code>s3</code>,<code>s2</code>,<code>s3</code>], k=2). Any approach must handle arbitrary 
<math>
k
</math>
, not assume 
<math>
k \le 1
</math>
.
