= Macro Analysis: 1RB1LA_1RC0RF_1RD---_0LE1RB_---0LA_1LD1RF =

== Transition table (6-state 2-symbol) ==

{| class="wikitable"
! !! 0 !! 1
|-
| A || 1RB || 1LA
|-
| B || 1RC || 0RF
|-
| C || 1RD || ---
|-
| D || 0LE || 1RB
|-
| E || --- || 0LA
|-
| F || 1LD || 1RF
|}

Undefined: C,1 and E,0.

== Tape structure ==

The tape is always a block of 1s with a small number of '''zero-markers''' scattered inside:

<pre>
0^inf  1^a₁  0  1^a₂  0  ...  1^aₖ  [HEAD]  1^b₁  0  1^b₂  0  ...  1^bₘ  0^inf
</pre>

The total tape length grows slowly (O(log steps)). The number of zero-markers varies by phase but is always small (≤ ~log(tape_length)).

== Macro operations ==

The machine alternates between micro-phases that compose into sweep cycles. A full sweep cycle is '''not''' a single atomic step — it decomposes into the following sequential phases:

=== Phase 1: A-sweep-left ===
* '''Rule''': A,1 → 1LA (identity sweep: writes 1 over 1, moves left)
* '''Effect''': Head races left across all 1s until hitting a 0 (zero-marker or left tape edge)
* '''Duration''': proportional to distance to the next zero-marker on the left
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>A_shift</code>: after k+1 steps, k ones moved from left to right

=== Phase 2: A-bounce + B-create-zero ===
* '''Rule''': A,0 → 1RB (1 step), then B,1 → 0RF (1 step)
* A consumes a zero-marker (writes 1 over it), moves right, becomes B
* B writes a '''new''' zero-marker one position to the right of the old one, becomes F going right
* Net effect: '''left zero-marker shifts right by 1'''
* '''Important''': after this phase, the machine is in '''state F''' going right — not state A. Getting back to state A requires completing the entire right-side sweep.

=== Phase 3: F-sweep-right ===
* '''Rule''': F,1 → 1RF (identity sweep: writes 1 over 1, moves right)
* '''Effect''': Head races right across 1s until hitting the next 0-marker or the right tape edge
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>F_shift</code>: after k+1 steps, k ones moved from right to left

=== Phase 4a: F-bounce at interior zero ===
* '''Rule''': F,0 → 1LD (1 step), then D,1 → 1RB (1 step), then B,1 → 0RF (1 step) — total 3 steps
* F consumes a zero-marker, bounces left as D, D bounces right as B, B creates a new zero-marker and becomes F again
* Net effect: the consumed zero is replaced by a '''new zero one position to the left'''
* '''Right zero-marker shifts left by 1'''
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>f_bounce_interior</code> (requires at least one 1 to the left of the zero, so D sees 1 not 0)
* After this, F continues sweeping right (back to Phase 3)

=== Phase 4b: BCD-extension at right tape edge ===
* '''Trigger''': B sees 0 at right tape edge (all ones to the right have been traversed)
* '''Rules''': B,0 → 1RC; C,0 → 1RD; D,0 → 0LE; E,1 → 0LA; A,1 → 1LA — total 5 steps
* The BCD chain writes two new 1-cells extending the tape rightward
* D,0 at the new right edge bounces back via E → A
* The last step (A,1 → 1LA) consumes one 1 from the left, so the head ends up one position further left
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>bcd_extension</code> (requires at least one 1 to the left)
* After this, A continues sweeping left (back to Phase 1)

== Sweep cycle summary ==

One complete '''sweep cycle''' consists of Phases 1–4 repeating until the head has traversed the entire tape:

# '''A sweeps left''' (Phase 1) to leftmost zero-marker or left tape edge
# '''A bounces + B creates zero''' (Phase 2): left zero shifts right by 1, machine enters state F
# '''F sweeps right''' (Phase 3) to next zero-marker
# '''F bounces''' (Phase 4a): right zero shifts left by 1, machine stays in state F — repeat steps 3–4 for each interior zero
# '''BCD extends''' (Phase 4b) at right tape edge: tape grows by 2 cells, machine returns to state A
# '''A sweeps left''' again (back to Phase 1 for the next cycle)

'''Key invariant''': each full sweep cycle moves every zero-marker '''one position inward''' (left zeros move right, right zeros move left).

'''Note''': the "zero moves inward" property is an '''emergent''' behavior of the full cycle, not a single step. Formalizing it requires tracking all zero-marker positions through the entire cycle.

== Era structure ==

An '''era''' begins when the tape is all-1s (no zero-markers) with state D reading the rightmost 1. This is the <code>E_Config n</code> configuration in the Lean formalization.

'''Observed E_Config events''' (D reading rightmost 1 of all-1s tape):

{| class="wikitable"
! Era !! Step !! Tape length !! E_Config n
|-
| 0 || 19 || 5 || E_Config 4
|-
| 1 || 84 || 11 || E_Config 10
|}

'''Corrected observation''': After E_Config 10, the machine enters a complex multi-zero-marker phase and does '''not''' return to an all-1s E_Config within 1M+ steps. The machine's behavior becomes increasingly complex, with persistent zero-markers that are never fully absorbed.

(Earlier claims of era boundaries at tape lengths 13, 27, 77 were incorrect — those were moments when the tape happened to be all-1s but the head was in a different state/position, not the D-at-rightmost-1 configuration.)

=== Simple era example (len=9, within era 0→1 transition) ===

Zero positions at each E→A transition:
<pre>
step  43: zpos=[1,7]   distance=6
step  58: zpos=[2,6]   distance=4
step  69: zpos=[3,5]   distance=2  → merge
</pre>
Three cycles to converge. Each cycle: both zeros move 1 inward.

=== Complex phase (len=15+, after era 1) ===

<pre>
step 120: zpos=[1,13]  distance=12
step 147: zpos=[2,12]  distance=10
step 170: zpos=[3,11]  distance=8
step 189: zpos=[4,10]  distance=6
step 204: zpos=[5,9]   distance=4
step 215: zpos=[6,8]   distance=2  → merge
step 230: zpos=[10,15] (tape grew to 17, new pair spawned)
step 243: zpos=[11,14] distance=3
step 249: zpos=[12,14] distance=2  → merge (then complex multi-zero phase)
</pre>

After the main pair merges, a '''secondary pair''' spawns at the right side, requiring further sub-era processing. This cascading behavior prevents the tape from returning to a clean all-1s state.

== Backward analysis of halt paths ==

Working backwards from the two undefined transitions:

=== C,1 halt path ===

* C is entered '''only''' from B,0 → 1RC (move R). So C reads the cell to B's right.
* B is entered from A,0 → 1RB or D,1 → 1RB (both move R).
* For C,1 halt: B must read 0 '''and''' the cell to B's right must be 1.
* In normal operation, B reads 0 only at the right tape edge, where the right tape is all 0s → C reads 0 (safe).
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>b0_zeros_safe</code>: B reading 0 with zeros to the right → C reads 0.
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>c1_halt_via_b</code>: B reading 0 with 1 to the right → halt in 2 steps.

=== E,0 halt path ===

* E is entered '''only''' from D,0 → 0LE (move L). D is entered from C,0 → 1RD or F,0 → 1LD.
* '''The C→D→E path is eliminated entirely''': C reads 0, writes 1, moves R to D. If D also reads 0, it moves L to E. E reads the cell where C wrote 1 → '''E always reads 1 via this path'''. '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>cd_to_e_safe</code>.
* The '''only''' remaining path to E,0 is F→D→E: F reads 0, writes 1, moves L to D. If D reads 0 (the cell to F's left was 0), it moves L to E. E reads 2 positions left of F.
* For E,0 halt: F must read 0 with '''two consecutive 0s''' to its left.
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>e0_necessary</code>: F reading 0 with <code>false :: false :: L</code> to its left → E reads 0 after 2 steps.
* '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>f0_d0_to_e</code>: general form, E reads <code>listHead L false</code>.
* '''E,0 fully eliminated''' by step-inductive invariant <code>E0Inv</code>. '''Proven''' in Lean as <code>e0_never_reached</code>.

=== Summary of halt conditions ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Halt !! Necessary condition !! Status
|-
| C,1 || B reads 0 with 1 to its right || '''Open''' — SafeRight invariant proposed, not yet proven step-inductively
|-
| E,0 || F reads 0 with two consecutive 0s to its left || '''Proven''' — <code>e0_never_reached</code> via <code>E0Inv</code>
|}

== SafeRight predicate (for C,1 elimination) ==

=== Definition ===

Period-3 recursive predicate on B.right. Ensures C always reads 0 through arbitrary depth of the B→C→D chain:

<pre>
SafeRight([])                       = True
SafeRight(true :: _)                = False   -- C reads 1 → halt
SafeRight(false :: [])              = True
SafeRight(false :: false :: _)      = True    -- D reads 0 → BCD extension
SafeRight(false :: true :: [])      = True
SafeRight(false :: true :: true :: _)   = True    -- B' reads 1 → F, safe
SafeRight(false :: true :: false :: rest) = SafeRight(rest)  -- recurse
</pre>

'''Proven''' in Lean: <code>SafeRight</code> definition + <code>SafeRight_head</code> (SafeRight implies C reads 0).

=== B→C→D chain mechanics ===

When B reads 0, the chain processes B.right in groups of 3:
* Position 0 (C reads): must be false for safety
* Position 1 (D reads): true (D,1→1RB, chain continues) or false (D,0→0LE, BCD extension)
* Position 2 (B' reads): true (B,1→0RF, goes to F, chain ends) or false (B,0→1RC, recurse)

Each recursion consumes 3 elements. SafeRight verified over 1M simulation steps.

=== A-condition ===

At A,0→B: B.head = listHead(A.right), B.right = listTail(A.right).
* If B reads 1 (listHead A.right = true): B→F, no C entry. Safe.
* If B reads 0: need SafeRight(listTail(A.right)).

The A-condition: when A reads 0, either B will read 1 OR B's right tape satisfies SafeRight.

'''Proven''' in Lean: <code>C1Inv</code> definition + <code>c1inv_init</code> (holds for initial config).

=== Step-inductive closure ===

The step-inductive proof of C1Inv requires additional per-state conditions:

'''c1inv_step case analysis''' (Lean proof, 12 transitions):

{| class="wikitable"
! Transition !! Status !! How
|-
| A,1→1LA || ✓ || listHead(true::R)=true → Or.inl
|-
| A,0→1RB || ✓ || A-condition directly gives B-condition
|-
| B,0→1RC || ✓ || vacuous (state=C)
|-
| B,1→0RF || ✓ || vacuous (state=F)
|-
| C,0→1RD || ✓ || SafeRight1_to_SafeRight2
|-
| C,1→none || ✓ || halted, vacuous
|-
| D,1→1RB || ✓ || SafeRight2_to_SafeRight
|-
| D,0→0LE || ✓ || vacuous (state=E)
|-
| E,0→none || ✓ || halted, vacuous
|-
| '''E,1→0LA''' || '''sorry''' || '''needs SafeRight(E.right) when E.left[0]=false'''
|-
| F,0→1LD || ✓ || SafeRight2(true :: R) = True
|-
| F,1→1RF || ✓ || vacuous
|}

11/12 cases closed. The sole remaining sorry is E,1→0LA.

=== E,1→A sorry: detailed analysis ===

E enters only from D,0. Two paths:

'''C→D→E''': E.left = <code>true :: B.left</code>. <code>listHead(E.left) = true</code>. A reads 1. '''Vacuous''' ✓

'''F→D→E''': E.right = <code>false :: true :: F.right</code>. E.left[0] = F.left[2].
* F.left[2] = true: A reads 1. Vacuous ✓
* F.left[2] = false: need <code>SafeRight(false :: true :: F.right)</code>.

<code>SafeRight(false :: true :: F.right)</code> is True when:
* F.right = <code>[]</code> → True ✓
* F.right starts with true → True ✓
* F.right = <code>false :: false :: _</code> → <code>SafeRight(false :: _) = True</code> ✓
* F.right = <code>false :: true :: rest</code> → <code>SafeRight(rest)</code> ← '''ONLY DANGEROUS CASE'''

'''Simulation (1M steps)''': When F.left=[0,1,0,...], F.right NEVER starts with <code>false :: true :: ...</code>. It is always empty or starts with true. So the dangerous case never occurs.

=== The F-joint condition (sole remaining obstacle) ===

The proof obligation reduces to:

<pre>
F.head = false → F.left[0] = false → F.left[2] = false →
  SafeRight(false :: true :: F.right)
</pre>

This holds trivially when F.right starts with true or is empty. The only dangerous case (F.right = <code>false :: true :: rest</code>) never occurs because when F.left[2]=false, F is at the last zero-marker and F.right is blank tape.

'''Why it's hard to prove''': this couples F.left[2] with F.right structure — a left/right correlation depending on zero-marker spacing (global tape property).

=== Mathematical obstacles ===

# '''Non-local coupling''': The F.left/F.right correlation depends on spacing between zero-markers — a global tape property, not capturable by local cell conditions.
# '''Circularity''': Proving sweep cycle completion requires the invariant; proving the invariant requires cycle completion.
# '''SafeRight breaks mid-A-sweep''': During A,1→1LA, trues prepend to A.right. SafeRight(true :: _) = False, so SafeRight cannot be uniform across states.
# '''A,0→B creates new B.right''': Comes from global tape structure at bounce point, not local transformation.
# '''Unbounded F-bounce chain''': Joint condition at each bounce depends on previous bounce; correlation depends on inter-zero distances.

== Macro-level representation ==

=== Run-length encoding ===

The tape is encoded as a list of run lengths <code>[a₁, a₂, ..., aₖ]</code> where each <code>aᵢ</code> counts consecutive 1s between zero-markers:

<pre>
runs [a, b, c] = ones a ++ [false] ++ ones b ++ [false] ++ ones c
</pre>

'''Proven''' in Lean: <code>runs</code> definition + <code>runs_succ</code>, <code>runs_cons₂</code>, <code>runs_singleton</code> simp lemmas.

=== Macro configurations ===

Two configuration types encode the cursor position:

* '''M_Config L c R''': state A, head on rightmost 1 of cursor run. <code>c</code> = cursor run size, <code>L</code> = left runs (nearest first), <code>R</code> = right runs. Two boundary zeros separate cursor from right runs.
* '''M0_Config L R''': state A reading 0 (cursor at zero between runs). <code>L</code> = left runs, <code>R</code> = right runs.

<pre>
M_Config L c R  = ⟨stA, ones(c-1) ++ [0] ++ runs(L), head=1, [0,0] ++ runs(R)⟩
M0_Config L R   = ⟨stA, runs(L), head=0, [0,0] ++ runs(R)⟩
</pre>

'''Proven''' in Lean: <code>M_Config</code>, <code>M0_Config</code> definitions + <code>M_Config_nil</code>, <code>M_Config_cons</code>, <code>M0_Config_nil</code>, <code>M0_Config_cons</code> simp lemmas.

=== Era entry ===

* <code>era_to_macro</code>: <code>E_Config n 0</code> → <code>M_Config [] (n+2) []</code> in 5 steps. '''Proven.'''

=== Macro rules (all proven in Lean) ===

Seven rules govern the dynamics. Notation: <code>(c)</code> marks the cursor position, <code>M0[...]</code> denotes an <code>M0_Config</code>.

{| class="wikitable"
! # !! Rule !! Step count !! Lean theorem
|-
| 1 || <code>[a, (c+3), d, R...] → [a+1, (c+1), d+1, R...]</code> || 2c+13 || <code>macro_sweep</code>
|-
| 1t || <code>[a, (2), d, R...] → M0[a+1, d+1, R...]</code> || 11 || <code>macro_sweep_to_zero</code>
|-
| 1' || <code>[(c+3)] → [1, (c+1), 1]</code> || 2c+13 || <code>macro_sweep_solo</code>
|-
| 1't || <code>[(2)] → M0[1, 1]</code> || 11 || <code>macro_sweep_solo_to_zero</code>
|-
| 2 || <code>[a+1, (1), d, R...] → [(a+1), 1, d, R...]</code> || 6 || <code>macro_shift</code>
|-
| 3 || <code>[a+1, (0), 1] → [(a+6)]</code> || 8 || <code>macro_era_complete</code>
|-
| 4 || <code>[a, (0), z+4] → [a+4, (z+1), 1]</code> || z+13 || <code>macro_zero_bounce</code>
|-
| 4t || <code>[a, (0), 3] → M0[a+4, 1]</code> || 12 || <code>macro_zero_bounce_to_zero</code>
|-
| 5 || <code>[a, (0), 2, d, R...] → [(a+3), d+1, R...]</code> || 8 || <code>macro_zero_two</code>
|-
| 6 || <code>[..., (0), 1, z+1, R...] → Halt</code> || 6 || <code>macro_halt</code>
|}

'''Notes:'''
* Rules 1/1' are the main sweep cycle (A sweeps left, bounces, F sweeps right, bounces at interior zero, E→A restarts). Step count is <code>2*(c+3)+7</code>.
* Rules with suffix "t" are terminal variants where the cursor reaches 0 (transitions from <code>M_Config</code> to <code>M0_Config</code>).
* Rule 2 shifts the cursor left when the cursor run = 1.
* Rules 4/4t handle the zero-bounce: A reads 0 at left edge, BCD chain extends and F sweeps right across the entire right run.
* Rule 5 handles the special case where the right run = 2.
* Rule 3 completes an era when the right run = 1 (last zero-marker absorbed).
* Rule 6 is the halt condition (C reads 1). '''Never reached''' in normal operation — proving this is the open problem.

== Proven results (Lean) ==

=== Single-step and chain lemmas ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Theorem !! Statement !! Proof
|-
| <code>A_shift</code> || A sweeps left through k ones in k+1 steps || induction + <code>tm_ind_succ</code>
|-
| <code>F_shift</code> || F sweeps right through k ones in k+1 steps || induction + <code>tm_ind_succ</code>
|-
| <code>bcd_extension</code> || B at right edge extends tape by 2, returns A in 5 steps || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>f_bounce_interior</code> || F at interior zero bounces back as F in 3 steps || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>a0_to_b</code> || A,0 → B: B's left starts with true || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>d1_to_b</code> || D,1 → B: B's left starts with true || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>b1_to_f</code> || B,1 → F: F's left starts with false || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>f0_d0_to_e</code> || F reads 0 with 0 left → E reads 2 cells left of F || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>b0_to_c</code> || B reads 0 → C reads first element of B's right tape || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>b0_zeros_safe</code> || B reads 0 with zeros right → C reads 0 (no halt) || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>cd_to_e_safe</code> || C→D→E path: E always reads 1 || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>f0_d0_e_safe</code> || F reads 0 with [0,1,...] left → E reads 1 (safe) || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>e0_necessary</code> || E,0 requires F reading 0 with two consecutive 0s left || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>a_b_f_d_e_safe</code> || A,0 → B,1 → F,0 → D,0 → E: E reads 1 || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>d_b_f_d_e_safe</code> || D,1 → B,1 → F,0 → D,0 → E: E reads 1 || <code>sw_steps</code>
|-
| <code>c1_halt_via_b</code> || C,1 halt requires B reading 0 with 1 to right || <code>sw_steps</code>
|}

=== E,0 elimination (fully proven) ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Theorem !! Statement !! Proof
|-
| <code>E0Inv</code> || 4-condition step-inductive invariant for E,0 || definition
|-
| <code>e0inv_init</code> || E0Inv holds for initConfig || <code>simp</code>
|-
| <code>e0inv_step</code> || E0Inv preserved by single TM step || <code>fin_cases</code> + <code>simp_all</code>
|-
| <code>e0inv_run</code> || E0Inv preserved by k steps || induction
|-
| <code>e0_never_reached</code> || E always reads 1 (E,0 unreachable) || from <code>E0Inv</code>
|}

=== C,1 elimination (partially proven) ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Theorem !! Statement !! Proof
|-
| <code>SafeRight</code> || Period-3 recursive predicate on B.right tape || definition
|-
| <code>SafeRight_head</code> || SafeRight implies C reads 0 || cases
|-
| <code>SafeRight1</code>, <code>SafeRight2</code> || Shifted SafeRight for states C and D || definitions
|-
| <code>SafeRight_to_SafeRight1</code> || SafeRight → SafeRight1 (B→C shift) || cases
|-
| <code>SafeRight1_to_SafeRight2</code> || SafeRight1 → SafeRight2 (C→D shift) || cases
|-
| <code>SafeRight2_to_SafeRight</code> || SafeRight2 → SafeRight (D→B shift) || cases
|-
| <code>C1Inv</code> || B + A + C + D conditions for C,1 elimination || definition
|-
| <code>c1inv_init</code> || C1Inv holds for initConfig || <code>simp</code>
|-
| <code>c1inv_step</code> || C1Inv step-inductive ('''11/12 cases''') || <code>fin_cases</code> + <code>simp_all</code>, '''1 sorry''' (E,1→A)
|-
| <code>C1Inv_ext</code> || Extended invariant adding F/D/E conditions || definition
|-
| <code>c1inv_ext_init</code> || C1Inv_ext holds for initConfig || <code>simp</code>
|-
| <code>c1inv_ext_step</code> || C1Inv_ext step-inductive || '''1 sorry''' (B,1→F)
|}

=== Macro rules (all proven) ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Theorem !! Statement !! Proof method
|-
| <code>era_to_macro</code> || E_Config n 0 → M_Config [] (n+2) [] in 5 steps || <code>simp only</code>
|-
| <code>macro_sweep</code> || Rule 1: [a,(c+3),d,R] → [a+1,(c+1),d+1,R] in 2c+13 steps || run_add + composed lemmas
|-
| <code>macro_sweep_to_zero</code> || Rule 1t: [a,(2),d,R] → M0[a+1,d+1,R] in 11 steps || <code>simp only</code>
|-
| <code>macro_sweep_solo</code> || Rule 1': [(c+3)] → [1,(c+1),1] in 2c+13 steps || run_add + composed lemmas
|-
| <code>macro_sweep_solo_to_zero</code> || Rule 1't: [(2)] → M0[1,1] in 11 steps || <code>rfl</code>
|-
| <code>macro_shift</code> || Rule 2: [a+1,(1),d,R] → [(a+1),1,d,R] in 6 steps || cases L + <code>simp only</code>
|-
| <code>macro_era_complete</code> || Rule 3: [a+1,(0),1] → [(a+6)] in 8 steps || cases L + <code>simp only</code>
|-
| <code>macro_zero_bounce</code> || Rule 4: [a,(0),z+4] → [a+4,(z+1),1] in z+13 steps || run_add + composed lemmas
|-
| <code>macro_zero_bounce_to_zero</code> || Rule 4t: [a,(0),3] → M0[a+4,1] in 12 steps || cases L + <code>simp only</code>
|-
| <code>macro_zero_two</code> || Rule 5: [a,(0),2,d,R] → [(a+3),d+1,R] in 8 steps || cases L + <code>simp only</code>
|-
| <code>macro_halt</code> || Rule 6: [...,(0),1,z+1,R] → Halt in 6 steps || <code>simp only</code>
|}

=== Concrete computations ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Theorem !! Statement !! Proof
|-
| <code>sweeper_init_to_era0</code> || initConfig → E_Config 4 0 in 19 steps || <code>rfl</code>
|-
| <code>era_0_to_1</code> || E_Config 4 0 → E_Config 10 0 in 65 steps || <code>rfl</code>
|}

== Remaining sorries (4) ==

{| class="wikitable"
! Sorry !! Status !! Blocker
|-
| <code>c1inv_step</code> (E,1→A case) || Intermediate || Needs SafeRight(E.right) when E.left[0]=false (the F-joint condition)
|-
| <code>c1inv_ext_step</code> (B,1→F case) || Intermediate || Needs F-condition for newly created F; cascading depth problem
|-
| <code>c1_never_reached</code> || Open || Follows from either c1inv_step or c1inv_ext_step being completed
|-
| <code>sweeper_never_halts</code> || Open || Follows from <code>c1_never_reached</code> + <code>e0_never_reached</code>
|}

== Conjectures ==

=== C1 (Non-halting — structural) ===
'''The machine never halts.''' The two undefined transitions C,1 and E,0 are never reached because:
* C,1 requires B to read 0 with a 1 to its right. But B reads 0 only at the right tape edge (the only place B sees 0). The next cell is also 0 (blank), so C always sees 0.
* E,0 requires F to read 0 with two consecutive 0s to its left. '''Proven''' unreachable by <code>E0Inv</code>.

'''Proof status''': E,0 half '''done'''. C,1 half requires SafeRight + joint F condition, blocked by mathematical obstacles (see above).

=== C2 (Zero-marker dynamics) ===
'''Each full sweep cycle shifts every zero-marker exactly one position inward (left zeros move right, right zeros move left).'''

'''Caveat from proof attempt''': This property is '''emergent''' from the full cycle, not a single-step property. A naive formulation is '''false''' — the intermediate states pass through F, D, B before returning to A.

== Key transitions for proof ==

The non-halting proof reduces to two tape invariant properties:

# '''E,0 unreachable''': F reads 0 only at interior zero-markers (where left tape starts with at least one 1). '''PROVEN''' via <code>E0Inv</code>.
# '''C,1 unreachable''': B reads 0 only at the right tape edge (where right tape is all 0s). '''OPEN''' — SafeRight invariant defined but not yet proven step-inductive.

Once both are proven, <code>sweeper_never_halts</code> follows directly.

== Cryptid argument ==

This section argues that <code>c1_never_reached</code> cannot be proven by a finite-depth step-inductive invariant on the zipper representation. The machine is therefore a '''cryptid''' in the sense of bbchallenge: its non-halting is empirically certain but resists formalization via known proof methods.

=== What works: E0Inv ===

The E,0 elimination succeeds because E0Inv has three properties that make step-induction tractable:

# Each condition is '''depth ≤ 2''' on '''one side''' of the tape (left only).
# Each transition '''locally''' preserves or re-establishes the condition.
# No condition couples left-tape values with right-tape values.

=== What fails: C1Inv and all extensions ===

The C,1 elimination requires SafeRight — a '''recursive''' predicate on B.right with unbounded depth (period-3 recursion). The step-inductive proof of C1Inv closes 11/12 transitions. The sole remaining case is '''E,1→0LA''', which requires knowing SafeRight(E.right) when E.left[0]=false. This couples F's left tape with F's right tape via zero-marker spacing.

An extended invariant C1Inv_ext was constructed with per-state conditions for F, D, and E, creating a chain F→D→E→A. This closes the E,1→A case but opens a '''new''' sorry at '''B,1→0RF''': when B reads 1 and creates F, the F-condition for the new F requires <code>SafeRight(false :: true :: listTail(B.right))</code>, which depends on B's right tape structure — information not carried by C1Inv_ext.

=== The infinite cascade ===

Systematic attempts to close the B,1→F sorry by adding conditions reveal an '''infinite cascade''':

# '''Add B,1 condition''': <code>B.head=true → r[0]=false → l[1]=false → SafeRight(false :: true :: listTail r)</code>. This requires an A-condition at A,0→1RB.

# '''Add A,0 condition''': <code>A.head=false → A.right[0]=true → A.right[1]=false → A.left[0]=false → SafeRight(false :: true :: A.right[2:])</code>. This is vacuous at E,1→0LA (since A.right[0]=false there), but at A,1→1LA it requires an A,1 condition.

# '''Add A,1 condition''': <code>A.head=true → l[0]=false → r[0]=false → l[1]=false → SafeRight(false :: true :: listTail r)</code>. Simulation confirms this configuration '''never occurs''' (0 events in 2M steps). But proving it never occurs requires an E-condition.

# '''Add E condition''': <code>E.head=true → E.left[0]=true → E.left[1]=false → E.left[2]=false → SafeRight(false :: true :: E.right)</code>. Simulation confirms '''never occurs''' (0 events). But proving it requires a D-condition.

# '''Add D condition''': <code>D.head=false → D.left=[1,1,0,0,...] → SafeRight(D.right)</code>. Simulation confirms '''never occurs''' (D.left[3] is always 1). But proving D.left[3]=true requires an F-condition at depth 4, which requires a B-condition at depth 7, which requires...

Each level shifts the obligation to a '''deeper left-tape index'''. After ''n'' iterations of the cascade, the condition requires information about left-tape position ~4''n''. Since the tape grows without bound, '''no finite collection of conditions''' can close the induction.

=== Simulation evidence ===

Exhaustive simulation over 2,000,000 steps confirms:

* SafeRight(false :: true :: listTail r) holds at '''all''' 227 B,1 events where r[0]=false and l[1]=false.
* In 195 of these, r[1]=true → SafeRight trivially True.
* In the remaining 32, B is at the '''right tape edge''' (B.right is all-zeros in the physical tape; in the zipper model B.right is [false] or similar). SafeRight of all-false tapes is trivially True.
* The "dangerous" left-tape patterns at each cascade level have 0 occurrences:
** A,1 with l[0]=0, r[0]=0, l[1]=0: '''0 events'''
** E,1 with l=[1,0,0,...]: '''0 events'''
** D,0 with l=[1,1,0,0,...]: '''0 events'''
** F,0 with l=[0,1,1,0,0,...]: '''0 events'''

The conditions are vacuously true at each level because the tape structure prevents the dangerous configurations. But the '''reason''' they never occur is a '''global property''' of zero-marker spacing — specifically, that between any two zero-markers there are always enough 1s to prevent the dangerous alignment. This spacing property is itself an emergent consequence of the sweep dynamics and cannot be captured by any fixed finite-depth predicate on either side of the tape.

=== Why macro-step induction also fails ===

All 7 macro rules (plus terminal variants) are '''proven''' in Lean — the macro-level transition system is fully formalized. However, having the rules is not sufficient:

# '''Proving which rule applies''' at each macro step requires knowing the tape structure (run lengths). Rule 6 (halt) applies when R starts with <code>[1, z+1, ...]</code> — proving this never happens requires the very invariant we seek.
# '''Characterizing all reachable run-length lists''' requires tracking the exact positions and spacings of all zero-markers through the cascading sub-era structure.
# '''The cascading depth is unbounded''': after era 1, zero-marker pairs spawn recursively upon annihilation. The run-length list has k entries where k grows without bound.

The Cryptid proof works because its macro states (P(a), Q(a,b)) have '''two parameters''' that capture the full tape structure. This machine's tape has '''k zero-markers at arbitrary positions''' within a ones-block of length L, where k grows logarithmically with L. A macro state would need k parameters to capture marker positions, and the transition function between macro states is itself recursive in k. This is qualitatively harder than a fixed-parameter system.

=== Structural comparison ===

{| class="wikitable"
! Property !! E0Inv (proven) !! C1Inv (stuck)
|-
| Predicate depth || ≤ 2 || unbounded (SafeRight recurses)
|-
| Tape sides involved || left only || both (left/right coupling)
|-
| Per-state conditions || 4, all local || cascading, each requiring deeper depth
|-
| Information flow || single-step || multi-sweep (global tape structure)
|-
| Sufficient condition || finite depth || requires global marker-spacing invariant
|}

=== Conclusion ===

The machine 1RB1LA_1RC0RF_1RD---_0LE1RB_---0LA_1LD1RF is a '''cryptid'''. Its non-halting depends on a global tape invariant (zero-marker spacing) that couples the left and right sides of the tape at arbitrary depth. This invariant is:

* '''Empirically verified''' over 2M steps with no violations.
* '''Not expressible''' as a finite-depth step-inductive predicate on the zipper representation.
* '''Not capturable''' by a fixed-parameter macro-step system due to the unbounded cascading structure of zero-marker dynamics.

Known proof methods for TM non-halting — step-inductive invariants, finite macro-step systems, and bounded tape-structure characterizations — are insufficient. A proof would require either a fundamentally new invariant framework (e.g., regular-language characterization of reachable tapes, or a well-founded ordering on tape configurations) or a qualitatively different proof strategy.
